the world that you and i are operating
in right now like this conscious waking
world of tangible physical objects you
can touch and feel away
is like a thin sliver of veneer
that we're existing in we're existing in
this thin sliver of space
and we're connected to this thing that
we can experience under normal conscious
states and this thing is constantly
being affected
and changed by what's happening in this
thin sliver of veneer so all the
thoughts that you have all the behavior
that you exhibit all the actions that
you take
all of those things that exist in this
thin veneer
is affecting all of this that's going on
in eternity that there's this infinite
space of whatever these things are
whether they're souls or
interdimensional creatures or beings
but that the way you interact with other
people has a direct effect on that world
and that world has a direct effect on
the way you interact with people and
that you have to
develop some sort of harmony and i think
that people struggle to do that
throughout history and that's one of the
reasons why religion
is so
it's so common it's not just common it's
amongst all tribes they've always had a
belief almost all of them almost all
major civilizations have had a belief in
something larger than themselves and
whether it's gods or whether it's uh
like the the a lot of the native
americans thought that a lot of their
gods existed in nature the gods of
animals and coyotes were gods and the
sun was a god
that these
there's some
larger than this current experience
thing that we must pay homage to
that we must give praise to that we we
we must
feel the divine intervention
of these other realms
and it just exists in all cultures in
all societies
and i think part of that is because
there's moments in time where you
recognize
and you can have these moments in time
whether it's the birth of a child
whether it's true love whether it's just
the bonding between friends and an
incredible moment in life where you feel
like you get up just a chance for a
second to peek your head through the
clouds something more yeah and see that
there's something more and that you're
somehow another connected to this but
our monkey bodies will not allow us to
see it because
to survive you can't really live in that
realm
for most of human history if you wanted
to survive you had to be a barbarian you
had to be savage you had to have knives
and tools and you have to be able to
fight off predators and
warring tribes that want to invade you
there was you couldn't live in the
spiritual realm
until they figured out how to stockpile
ammunition and food and develop walls
exactly then they started tripping balls
right
he's not wrong or should i say he's very
far from being entirely wrong given what
we know in physics
now i do not wish to push this
comparison too far and i'm the first to
balk at linking the mystical to the
scientific and the best of our physical
explanations
but it is entirely true to say that what
we see observe and experience is but a
tiny sliver or the thinnest film on the
surface of the really existing
multiverse which stretches back billions
of years perhaps further
and off into an infinite future
but forget that because right now there
are universes simultaneously existing
here and now
identical fungible copies of this
universe to what extent fungible copies
of you are you we are yet to fully
explain
perhaps they are identically you and
consciousness really is consciousness of
those multiple entities simultaneously
until they differentiate into copies
which are now doing different things and
so now also consists of many many copies
of you doing something slightly
different and some things wildly
different but are those differences
as strange as worlds where magic works
for example
no as david deutsch explains in chapter
11 of the beginning of infinity the
multiverse chapter
only where magic appears to have worked
until now in other words by extreme
coincidence each time a bespeckled boy
lifts a wooden stick and shouts some
magic words sparks of lightning are
emitted from the tip of that stick all
by coincidence however and not because
the words or the stick cause the
lightening
and in those universes where that has
happened it should always be expected
that next time he tries to do it it will
fail and it will continue to fail so
that the proportion of universes where
it continues to happen continues to
vanish ever further and closer to zero
to a thinner and thinner sliver among
all the universes of the multiverse we
who follow in the everett tradition tend
to call these universes harry potter
universes and at the end of this video
i'm going to provide a short clip with
some brief excerpts from my discussion
of the beginning of infinity about
precisely that but the thing is
we always occupied the thin sliver as
joe referred to it there the multiverse
is vast vast beyond our capacity to
visualize but not to comprehend entirely
quantum physics does not cash out any
mystical claims but it can cash out this
idea that reality is so much more than
we observe or even than we can observe
it is absolutely true as joe says that
we exist in a thin sliver of space
now whether this has anything to do
whatsoever with intelligent beings that
may exist elsewhere in the multiverse
quantum theory is silent on that
it says that it is possible that
physical reality evolved elsewhere
differently to what it did in our
timeline that there may be simultaneous
with ours a physical reality existing of
really existing people vastly more
powerful than us we don't know
and our physical theories as we know
them
tend to prohibit our communicating with
them our communicating between universes
vastly different from our own
but that is of course our best
understanding of physical theory as it
is and we should take it seriously and
not fall down into any rabbit hole of
pseudoscience but we're free to
conjecture we can conjecture all we like
could entities that evolved in another
part of the multiverse have found the
successor to the successor to the
successor of quantum theory using that
theory can they communicate under some
conditions across the multiverse in ways
we cannot yet imagine
we cannot know right now we occupy only
a tiny sliver and are for now trapped in
a sense by our existing knowledge
but we won't be constrained by that
knowledge forever we won't be
constrained in generations to come the
way we are now
and this idea that all our behaviors
affect what goes on in eternity
should be taken seriously we can be a
beginning of infinity and if we are then
it is true that many of our choices
today will affect the course of events
off into a future we cannot imagine
today for it will consist
of a world inhabited by beings creating
knowledge we have no hope of predicting
now for if we could predict it now we
would have that knowledge now
maybe that world that joe speaks of is
in the future
we can have a direct effect on the
future personally and as a civilization
through the choices we make today and
the knowledge we create
into the future as well as across the
multiverse as we come to gain more and
more control of physical reality and by
understanding it
to a greater and greater accuracy
through our explanations
joe gets to these ideas intuitively
but there is a concordance here with
what we know about quantum theory
already i hasten to add once more
that grandiose claims have often been
made by invoking quantum theory in order
to cash out some of the more wild claims
in certain mystical traditions
i do not wish to do that
joe himself is not making strong claims
either but it should be reasonable to
say
he's not wrong
whether he is entirely right or not is
another thing altogether but then
quantum theory cannot be entirely right
or the final word either
all we know is that we both agree on
this
what we see and experiences merely the
thin veneer on an ocean of reality that
physics tells us is the largest
structure ever explained as really
existing by science
and the complexity of that structure and
what exists in that structure in some
ultimate sense could be beyond what
anyone right now is even capable of
imagining and you can have these moments
in time whether it's the birth of a
child whether it's true love whether
it's just the bonding between friends
and an incredible moment in life where
you feel like you get up just a chance
for a second to peak your head through
the clouds something more this
peek through the clouds this seeing
something more it can come from all
those things joe says
and it can come from science too
especially taking science a little more
seriously as an explanation of the
reality we cannot see and we cannot hope
to see
our brains forget our monkey bodies but
our brains run minds that are universal
and completely different to any monkey
in their ability to explain all this we
cannot explain everything right now in
practice and there will always be an
infinite amount more left to explain but
these special minds of ours
do allow us to glimpse the underlying
reality however imperfectly and it is
science that refines and brings into
focus what is really there now that
we've largely solved the problem of
surviving
we can turn to using these minds for
more than just finding food water and
shelter we can begin more deeply
understanding everything and
constructing physical reality around us
so that we can see more and more of it
and so that more and more of it becomes
a genuine part of our home
we no longer have to be barbarians we
are universal constructors and
explainers whose capacity to create
knowledge reaches out from here into
every part of reality and the more we
create that knowledge the more we'll
know how to create
transform and command ever faster and
ever more reliably the rest of the
multiverse
[Music]
i'm skipping a bit and i'm skipping to
a large part about what i would still
call harry potter universes where
david is talking about
balling some water for example and yes
and this is what in the last episode
brett weinstein was very concerned about
that sometimes these highly unlikely
events indeed
happen you know for example if you're
boiling water david writes in some tiny
sliver of the multiverse the kettle
transforms itself into a top hat and the
water into a rabbit which then hops away
and you get never neither teen or coffee
but rather a very surprise
that is a history
after that transformation but there is
no way of correctly explaining what was
happening during it or predicting the
probabilities without referring to other
parts of the multiverse enormously
larger parts with larger measures in
which there was no rabbit yes and so
there's no reason to reject
the multiverse just because there's this
tiny tiny sliver of universes in which
some bizarre things happen
and what david writes about this okay so
where we have a situation where you're
boiling water to make tea throughout
your entire life of course every time
you boil water to make tea one would
expect nothing particularly unusual
happens
but david does say well it's consistent
with the laws of it it's quite possible
for
the kettle to turn itself into a top hat
and the water to turn itself into a
rabbit which can hops away
so we've got these kind of two versions
the one in which you boil water nothing
unusual happens and you make tea and one
in which you end up with the rabbit on
that david says so i'm skipping a huge
amount here from this chapter from the
beginning of infinity but i'll just
concentrate on the section where he says
quote the rabbit history is
fundamentally different from the tea
history
in that the latter the tea history
remains very accurately autonomous
throughout the period in the rabbit
history i end up with memories that are
identical to what they would be in a
history in which water became a rabbit
but those are misleading memories
there was no such history the history
containing those memories began only
after the rabbit had formed for that
matter there are also places in the
multiverse
of far larger measure than that one
in which only my brain was affected
producing exactly those memories in
effect
i had an hallucination caused by random
motion of the atoms in my brain pause
there my reflection so just to
emphasize this bit
yes it's possible
that indeed a kettle can form itself
into a top hat
and water can form itself into a rabbit
such that boiling tea boiling water for
tea leads this rabbit jumping out of a
top hat but as david says there not only
is that exceedingly unlikely the tiny
tiny measure of universe with which that
happens
but
if you actually did have that memory
if you actually if that seemed to have
occurred to you the better explanation
according to quantum theory
is that that occurred only in your brain
that there was misfirings of neurons in
your brain that caused you to
hallucinate that exact thing rather than
that exact thing actually happening okay
so
quantum theory makes sense out of those
things and david writes straight after
that
some philosophers make a big issue of
that sort of thing
claiming that it casts doubt on the
scientific status of quantum theory but
of course they are empiricists in
reality misleading observations
misleading memories and false
interpretations are common even in the
mainstreams of history
we have to work hard to avoid fooling
ourselves with them so it is not quite
true that for instance there are
histories in which magic appears to work
there are only histories in which magic
appears to have worked but will never
work again
there are histories in which i appear to
have walked through a wall because all
the atoms of my body happened to resume
their original courses after being
deflected by atoms in the world but
those histories began at the wall the
true explanation of what happened
involves many other instances of me and
it or we can roughly explain it in terms
of random events a very low probability
it is a bit like winning a lottery the
winner cannot properly explain what has
just happened without invoking the
existence of many losers
in the multiverse the losers are the
other instances of oneself
[Music]
do
you